# Eugene 🔒 lint report of `examples/add_not_valid_fkey.sql`

This is a human readable SQL script safety report generated by [eugene](https://github.com/kaaveland/eugene). Keep in mind that lints can be ignored by adding a `-- eugene: ignore E123` comment to the SQL statement or by passing --ignore E123 on the command line.

The migration script did not pass all the checks ❌

## Statement number 1

### SQL

```sql
create table authors(id serial primary key, name text)
```

No checks matched for this statement. ✅

## Statement number 2

### SQL

```sql
alter table books add column author_id integer null
```

### Lints

#### Taking dangerous lock without timeout

ID: `E9`

A lock that would block many common operations was taken without a timeout. This can block all other operations on the table indefinitely if any other transaction holds a conflicting lock while `idle in transaction` or `active`. A safer way is: Run `SET LOCAL lock_timeout = '2s';` before the statement and retry the migration if necessary.

Statement takes lock on `public.books`, but does not set a lock timeout

## Statement number 3

### SQL

```sql
alter table books add constraint fk_books_authors foreign key (author_id) references authors(id) not valid
```

### Lints

#### Running more statements after taking `AccessExclusiveLock`

ID: `E4`

A transaction that holds an `AccessExclusiveLock` started a new statement. This blocks all access to the table for the duration of this statement. A safer way is: Run this statement in a new transaction.

Running more statements after taking `AccessExclusiveLock`

#### Taking dangerous lock without timeout

ID: `E9`

A lock that would block many common operations was taken without a timeout. This can block all other operations on the table indefinitely if any other transaction holds a conflicting lock while `idle in transaction` or `active`. A safer way is: Run `SET LOCAL lock_timeout = '2s';` before the statement and retry the migration if necessary.

Statement takes lock on `public.books`, but does not set a lock timeout

