# Eugene 🔒 trace report of `add_exclusion_constraint.sql`

This is a human readable lock tracing and migration report generated by [eugene](https://github.com/kaaveland/eugene) to assist you in writing safer database migration scripts.

Here are some tips for reading it:
- A lock is called **dangerous** ❌ if it will cause concurrent queries to **wait** for the migration to complete
- You read that right, once a lock is acquired, it is only released at the end of the script
- Eugene will tell you what kinds of queries **dangerous** locks would block in a summary
- **Hints** can sometimes help you avoid dangerous locks, or hold them for a shorter time
- It is hard to avoid dangerous locks, but we should minimize time spent while holding them
- Sometimes seemingly fast migration scripts cause long outages because of lock queues, [here is an example scenario](https://kaveland.no/careful-with-that-lock-eugene.html)

There is a summary section for the entire script at the start of the report and then a section for each statement in the script, that goes over the state of the database at the time the script was executed, as well as effects or hints specific to that particular statement

## Overall Summary

| Started at | Total duration (ms) | Number of dangerous locks |
|------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
| 2021-01-01T01:00:00+01:00 | 10 | 2 ❌ |

### All locks found

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe | Duration held (ms) |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|--------------------|
| `public` | `books` | `AccessExclusiveLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ | 10 |
| `public` | `books` | `ShareLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ | 10 |

### Dangerous locks found

- `AccessExclusiveLock` would block the following operations on `public.books`:
  + `SELECT`
  + `FOR UPDATE`
  + `FOR NO KEY UPDATE`
  + `FOR SHARE`
  + `FOR KEY SHARE`
  + `UPDATE`
  + `DELETE`
  + `INSERT`
  + `MERGE`
- `ShareLock` would block the following operations on `public.books`:
  + `UPDATE`
  + `DELETE`
  + `INSERT`
  + `MERGE`

## Statement number 1 for 10 ms

### SQL

```sql
alter table books add constraint title_exclusion exclude(title with =)
```

### Locks at start

No locks held at the start of this statement.

### New locks taken

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|
| `public` | `books` | `AccessExclusiveLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ |
| `public` | `books` | `ShareLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ |

### Hints

#### Creating a new index on an existing table

ID: `E6`

A new index was created on an existing table without the `CONCURRENTLY` keyword. This blocks all writes to the table while the index is being created. A safer way is: Run `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` instead of `CREATE INDEX`.

A new index was created on the table `public.books`. The index `public.title_exclusion` was created non-concurrently, which blocks all writes to the table. Use `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` to avoid blocking writes.

#### Creating a new exclusion constraint

ID: `E8`

Found a new exclusion constraint. This blocks all reads and writes to the table while the constraint index is being created. A safer way is: There is no safe way to add an exclusion constraint to an existing table.

A new exclusion constraint `title_exclusion` was added to the table `public.books`. There is no safe way to add an exclusion constraint to an existing table. This constraint creates an index on the table, and blocks all reads and writes.

#### Taking dangerous lock without timeout

ID: `E9`

A lock that would block many common operations was taken without a timeout. This can block all other operations on the table indefinitely if any other transaction holds a conflicting lock while `idle in transaction` or `active`. A safer way is: Run `SET LOCAL lock_timeout = '2s';` before the statement and retry the migration if necessary.

The statement took `AccessExclusiveLock` on the Table `public.books` without a timeout. It blocks `SELECT`, `FOR UPDATE`, `FOR NO KEY UPDATE`, `FOR SHARE`, `FOR KEY SHARE`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `INSERT`, `MERGE` while waiting to acquire the lock.

