# Eugene 🔒 trace report of `alter_column_not_null.sql`

This is a human readable lock tracing and migration report generated by [eugene](https://github.com/kaaveland/eugene) to assist you in writing safer database migration scripts.

Here are some tips for reading it:
- A lock is called **dangerous** ❌ if it will cause concurrent queries to **wait** for the migration to complete
- You read that right, once a lock is acquired, it is only released at the end of the script
- Eugene will tell you what kinds of queries **dangerous** locks would block in a summary
- **Hints** can sometimes help you avoid dangerous locks, or hold them for a shorter time
- It is hard to avoid dangerous locks, but we should minimize time spent while holding them
- Sometimes seemingly fast migration scripts cause long outages because of lock queues, [here is an example scenario](https://kaveland.no/careful-with-that-lock-eugene.html)

There is a summary section for the entire script at the start of the report and then a section for each statement in the script, that goes over the state of the database at the time the script was executed, as well as effects or hints specific to that particular statement

## Overall Summary

| Started at | Total duration (ms) | Number of dangerous locks |
|------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
| 2021-01-01T01:00:00+01:00 | 20 | 2 ❌ |

### All locks found

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe | Duration held (ms) |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|--------------------|
| `public` | `books` | `AccessExclusiveLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ | 20 |
| `public` | `books` | `ShareLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ | 10 |

### Dangerous locks found

- `AccessExclusiveLock` would block the following operations on `public.books`:
  + `SELECT`
  + `FOR UPDATE`
  + `FOR NO KEY UPDATE`
  + `FOR SHARE`
  + `FOR KEY SHARE`
  + `UPDATE`
  + `DELETE`
  + `INSERT`
  + `MERGE`
- `ShareLock` would block the following operations on `public.books`:
  + `UPDATE`
  + `DELETE`
  + `INSERT`
  + `MERGE`

## Statement number 1 for 10 ms

### SQL

```sql
alter table books alter column title set not null
```

### Locks at start

No locks held at the start of this statement.

### New locks taken

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|
| `public` | `books` | `AccessExclusiveLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ |

### Hints

#### Validating table with a new `NOT NULL` column

ID: `E2`

A column was changed from `NULL` to `NOT NULL`. This blocks all table access until all rows are validated. A safer way is: Add a `CHECK` constraint as `NOT VALID`, validate it later, then make the column `NOT NULL`.

The column `title` in the table `public.books` was changed to `NOT NULL`. If there is a `CHECK (title IS NOT NULL)` constraint on `public.books`, this is safe. Splitting this kind of change into 3 steps can make it safe:

1. Add a `CHECK (title IS NOT NULL) NOT VALID;` constraint on `public.books`.
2. Validate the constraint in a later transaction, with `ALTER TABLE public.books VALIDATE CONSTRAINT ...`.
3. Make the column `NOT NULL`


#### Taking dangerous lock without timeout

ID: `E9`

A lock that would block many common operations was taken without a timeout. This can block all other operations on the table indefinitely if any other transaction holds a conflicting lock while `idle in transaction` or `active`. A safer way is: Run `SET lock_timeout = '2s';` before the statement and retry the migration if necessary.

The statement took `AccessExclusiveLock` on the Table `public.books` without a timeout. It blocks `SELECT`, `FOR UPDATE`, `FOR NO KEY UPDATE`, `FOR SHARE`, `FOR KEY SHARE`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `INSERT`, `MERGE` while waiting to acquire the lock.

## Statement number 2 for 10 ms

### SQL

```sql
alter table books add constraint title_unique unique (title)
```

### Locks at start

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|
| `public` | `books` | `AccessExclusiveLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ |

### New locks taken

| Schema | Object | Mode | Relkind | OID | Safe |
|--------|--------|------|---------|-----|------|
| `public` | `books` | `ShareLock` | Table | 1 | ❌ |

### Hints

#### Running more statements after taking `AccessExclusiveLock`

ID: `E4`

A transaction that holds an `AccessExclusiveLock` started a new statement. This blocks all access to the table for the duration of this statement. A safer way is: Run this statement in a new transaction.

The statement is running while holding an `AccessExclusiveLock` on the Table `public.books`, blocking all other transactions from accessing it.

#### Creating a new index on an existing table

ID: `E6`

A new index was created on an existing table without the `CONCURRENTLY` keyword. This blocks all writes to the table while the index is being created. A safer way is: Run `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` instead of `CREATE INDEX`.

A new index was created on the table `public.books`. The index `public.title_unique` was created non-concurrently, which blocks all writes to the table. Use `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` to avoid blocking writes.

#### Creating a new unique constraint

ID: `E7`

Found a new unique constraint and a new index. This blocks all writes to the table while the index is being created and validated. A safer way is: `CREATE UNIQUE INDEX CONCURRENTLY`, then add the constraint using the index.

A new unique constraint `title_unique` was added to the table `public.books`. This constraint creates a unique index on the table, and blocks all writes. Consider creating the index concurrently in a separate transaction, then adding the unique constraint by using the index: `ALTER TABLE public.books ADD CONSTRAINT title_unique UNIQUE USING INDEX public.title_unique;`

#### Taking dangerous lock without timeout

ID: `E9`

A lock that would block many common operations was taken without a timeout. This can block all other operations on the table indefinitely if any other transaction holds a conflicting lock while `idle in transaction` or `active`. A safer way is: Run `SET lock_timeout = '2s';` before the statement and retry the migration if necessary.

The statement took `ShareLock` on the Table `public.books` without a timeout. It blocks `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `INSERT`, `MERGE` while waiting to acquire the lock.

